JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: the
Senate scramble on health care.
Republicans struggle to
make changes to win enough
votes to replace Obamacare.
We talk with one senator
at the center of the storm,
John Thune of South Dakota.
Then: Most Americans
disapprove of the GOP's
handling of health care.
Our "PBS NewsHour"/NPR/MARIST
poll has the latest
on public sentiment of
the Trump presidency.
And one side effect of summer:
a spike in Lyme disease.
Miles O'Brien looks at
why there is a vaccine
for dogs, but not humans.
SUSAN O'BELL, Veterinarian:
When I pull ticks off of my
children, I wish that I had some
easy options like vaccination
or prevention, like I can
give for my dogs, because it's
an issue for people
and their pets alike.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senate Republican
leaders have spent this day
behind closed doors trying
to win over more of
their own members in the
health care reform fight.
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell
has delayed any action until
after the Fourth of July
recess, but a spokesman says
he hopes to have a revised
bill as soon as Friday.
At the White House, President
Trump suggested the effort is
working along very well, despite
the obstacles.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: It's very tough.
Every state is different.
Every senator is different.
But I have to tell you, the
Republican senators had a really
impressive meeting yesterday
at the White House.
I think we're going to get at
least very close, and I think
we're going to get it over the
line.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later, the
president told reporters
- - quote -- "We're going
to have a big surprise
on health care."
He didn't say what that meant.
We will hear about all of this
from Republican Senator John
Thune after the news summary.
The president's former
campaign chairman has
registered, retroactively,
as a foreign agent.
Paul Manafort filed papers
Tuesday that show his firm was
paid more than $17 million by
a pro-Russian political
party in Ukraine.
He resigned from the Trump
campaign last August, when word
of his consulting work leaked.
In March of this year, Michael
Flynn, who had been fired
as the president's national
security adviser, also
registered as a foreign agent.
Businesses and governments
around the globe spent a second
day battling a cyber-attack.
The so-called ransomware assault
eased some today, but in the
U.S., a subsidiary of FedEx
was disrupted, and a
Cadbury chocolate factory in
Australia had to shut down.
In London, British Defense
Secretary Michael Fallon said
it is verging on an act of war.
MICHAEL FALLON, U.K. Defense
Secretary: State or nonstate
entities, lurking behind a veil
of encryption, targeting
our national infrastructure,
as we saw with the
recent cyber-strike on
Parliament itself,
that isn't a cold war.
That's a gray war, permanently
teetering on the edge
of outright hostility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The outbreak
began in Ukraine, where it has
done the most damage so far.
We will take a closer
look later in the program.
The months-long unrest
in Venezuela took a
dramatic turn overnight.
The government says that a
police helicopter opened fire
on the nation's Supreme Court
and Interior Ministry.
Amateur video captured
images of the helicopter,
before it disappeared.
Officials charged the
mastermind of the plot was a
rogue police pilot and actor.
Opponents of socialist President
Nicolas Maduro suggested that
the raid could be a government
ploy to justify
increased repression.
Former members of Colombia's
largest rebel group now face
the challenge of reintegrating
into society.
The one-time fighters
of the FARC surrendered
their weapons at a
disarmament camp on Tuesday.
U.N. inspectors
supervised the ceremony.
The rebels staged a peace
agreement last year,
after decades of fighting.
In Liverpool, England, six
people, most of them police
officials, were charged today
in a 1989 soccer
stadium disaster.
They are accused of offenses
ranging from negligence to
manslaughter in the deaths of
96 people.
The victims were crushed when
thousands of people rushed
into a crowded section of a
stadium.
Police blamed rowdy fans,
but the families finally
won a new investigation.
TREVOR HICKS, Father of
Victims: I mean, there
are no winners in this.
It doesn't bring anybody
back from the disaster.
But what it does do, it sends a
message out of accountability,
as we keep saying, that
nobody, but nobody is
above the law, be it the
police or anybody else.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The accused
include the man who was leading
police operations at the stadium
that day.
Back in this country, the
Homeland Security Department
announced that it's stepping up
security measures for
flights coming into the U.S.
They include enhanced
screening of electronic
devices and passengers.
Airlines that comply could
be exempt from an earlier
ban on carry-on laptops.
Those that don't comply
may face a total ban
on electronic devices.
Wall Street rallied today behind
financial and tech stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial
average gained nearly 144
points to close at 21454.
The Nasdaq rose 87, and
the S&P 500 added 21.
And Michael Bond, creator
of the beloved children's
literary character
Paddington Bear, has died
in Britain.
Bond first introduced the
marmalade-loving teddy in "A
Bear Called Paddington" in 1958.
That led ultimately to more
than 20 books, several TV
shows and a 2014 movie.
Michael Bond was 91 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Republican senators speed
up their efforts to revise
the GOP's health care bill; new
poll numbers reveal what the
nation thinks about that and
the president; a massive
cyber-attack spreads throughout
the globe; and much more.
Here's a question.
What's next in the
Republican effort to repeal
and replace Obamacare?
I spoke short time ago with
one of the senators who helped
write the now-delayed bill, John
Thune of South Dakota.
He is chairman of the Republican
Conference, making him the
third-ranking Republican in
the Senate.
Senator Thune, thank
you for joining us.
I want to start out asking
you where the negotiations
stand this afternoon.
The president acknowledged
today that it's going to be
very tough, but then he went on
to say there's a
big surprise coming.
Do you know what he
was talking about?
(LAUGHTER)
SEN.
JOHN THUNE (R), South Dakota:
Well, I'm not sure what that
is, Judy, but thank you.
It's nice to be with you.
I think the state of
negotiations at the moment
are we're still having
conversations and working
through the issues that right
now are, I think, keeping us
from getting to a consensus, and
I hope that eventually we will
be able to work through those.
But that's the next few days.
And I think the goal is, as
much as we can, have at least
sort of a framework in place
by the end of the week that we
can send to the Congressional
Budget Office to get scoring
back, so that when we come
back after the Fourth of July
break next week, the following
week, we can move a bill to
the floor, get it up and get
to work on it and open up the
amendment process and
hopefully eventually pass it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is the
bigger challenge, Senator?
Is it appealing to
the moderates, who
believe that the cuts in
Medicaid and other parts
of the bill are too
hard on those with lower
income, or is it the more
conservative members,
who want a bigger
repeal of Obamacare?
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: It's kind
of a combination.
And it's really -- you know,
there are some things, Judy,
in this process that you can
dial back and forth.
And we have been trying to
turn those dials as much as we
can to bring people on board.
But we do have the more
conservative members
in our conference who
have specific things
that they want to see
addressed in this bill.
And then we have got more
moderate members who, as you
mentioned, are concerned about
Medicaid and trying to put, you
know, the final touches on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me
pick up on the Medicaid point,
because we are hearing today
from more health care experts
who say these Medicaid changes
would force the states to
make some very tough
decisions about what
they're going to pay for.
They talk about things
like in-home services
for the elderly, for
people with disabilities.
And they say those could be
in very serious jeopardy.
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: Well, look, I think
the thing with Medicare --
and a lot of this -- I should
say, with Medicaid -- and this
is going to depend -- states
are going to be in a position
to have a lot of flexibility.
What this basically does is
allows them to choose the two
base years that they would
calculate current their
reimbursement levels on.
And there's a separate
reimbursement for elderly,
so for nursing home
recipients, another one
for the blind and disabled,
another one for children, and
yet another one for able-bodied
adults.
And they all have per-capita
allotments based upon what the
states are experiencing today
in terms of Medicaid costs.
And then those are inflated
over the years, the next
decade, increased at the rate of
inflation.
And so they have to figure
out how to take those dollars
and put them to the best use
in the state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking
of state by state, the Center
for American Progress took
those CBO numbers.
They broke them down by state.
They looked at South
Dakota, your home state.
They determined that
almost 64,000 fewer
South Dakotans would be
covered under the Senate
plan by 2026 than if
the ACA remained in
effect, and that includes
something like 40,000 on
Medicaid, 24,000 on
the individual market.
How would you deal with that?
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: Well, I don't
know how they would - - how
they came up with that number.
In my state of South Dakota,
we weren't an expansion state.
And we currently operate
the Medicaid program in
a fairly cost-effective
and efficient way.
People in the individual
marketplace should
have more options.
The plan that we -- the
discussion draft that
we have out there today,
which is in the process,
of course, of being modified,
actually opens up for people
who are zero percent to 100
percent of the federal
poverty level, not eligible
for Medicaid, would
open up the opportunity
for them to purchase
insurance with help from
the federal government.
And in my state,
that's 37,000 people.
So there are 37,000 people
today who don't have access
to health insurance that would
under the proposal that --
the discussion draft at least
that is out there today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another subject,
Senator, a lot of reporting
in the last few days about
President Trump's
role in all this.
A number of reports saying the
president is not as steeped
in the details as he might
otherwise be, and that
he doesn't have a strong
view of how this should
come out, that mainly
his view is he just wants
to see something passed.
What is your how -- would you
describe the president's role?
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: I think
he does want a result.
He clearly, in the meeting that
we had about him yesterday,
was trying to sort of push
the process along, realizing
that the Senate has a
role to play and that
there are differences
of opinion.
And I think he got a flavor
yesterday for what we have
been hearing in our meetings
with Republican Senators,
because some of those
differences came out.
But I think the
president is engaged.
He's, obviously, talking to
individual senators about
their specific concerns.
He's talking to
groups of senators.
He had all of us
down there yesterday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: So I think he
wants to get a result, Judy.
And I think he wants it to be
a health care plan, proposal
that we can go out there and
defend and that he can
defend and argue for
to the American people.
And I don't -- I still think
we're going to get there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last weekend,
I'm sure you know, there was
a pro-Trump political action
committee that ran an attack
ad, essentially, against Senator
Dean Heller of Nevada, who
was at that point
expressing concerns about
the health care bill.
And the reporting is that
Leader McConnell called the
White House, said that this was
stupid to do.
Is this something that you and
other Republicans have let the
White House know you don't want
them to do?
I mean, what are you saying
to the White House about this?
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: I think it's been
conveyed in pretty uncertain
-- I should say certain terms
that, that's a bad idea.
Particularly in the middle
of a discussion where you're
trying to get to a result on
a major consequential issue
like this, you don't want to
have one of your own members
being attacked.
We need to get to 50, but that
works a lot better if members
are allowed to be able to
discuss it with their
colleagues, with their
constituents, and not
have the threat of a
political campaign hanging
out there over their head.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And finally,
just quickly, Senator Thune, any
serious discussion of including
Democrats in these
deliberations?
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: It's my preferred
working style here is to
have bipartisan legislation.
I think what the Democrats have
made clear is that they don't
want to deal with anything
that repeals and
replaces Obamacare.
I think they wouldn't want
to do anything that gets rid
of the mandates, which is a
big part of our proposal,
getting rid of the
individual employer mandates.
They would want
to keep the taxes.
And we want to do away
with taxes that are driving
up the costs of premiums.
So, I think it would be hard to
see a scenario where Democrats
would be willing to come to
the table in good faith and
actually work with us on a
solution that meets those -- you
know, those requirements.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator
John Thune, a member
of the Republican
leadership, thank you very
much.
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The "NewsHour,"
in partnership with the Marist
Institute for Public Opinion
and NPR, is out with a new
poll that looks at Americans'
opinions on President Trump,
health care, the
economy and more.
Joining me now to dig into
the results are Lee Miringoff
of Marist and Amy Walter of
The Cook Political Report.
Welcome to both of you.
Lee, I'm going to
start with you.
Let's look at one of the
questions, first, about the
Republican health care plan...
LEE MIRINGOFF, Director,
Marist Institute for
Public Opinion: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
... in the Senate.
This is the plan the
president is pushing for.
You asked people their
assessment of the Senate plan.
What did you find?
LEE MIRINGOFF: Well, it was very
poor in terms of public opinion.
And what's fascinating in the
numbers is even a plurality of
Republicans around the nation
are unsure on terms of the
Senate health care plan.
So the Republicans took a very
big risk going forward with
something when they didn't even
have their core following
solidly behind them.
And I think the proof
is in the results.
The Democrats,
obviously, were opposed.
Independents have been scurrying
away from the Republicans
and questioning President
Trump and Republicans in
Congress in greater numbers.
So, as far as the health care
proposal is concerned, it
clearly didn't have the kind
of support that you would want
to go forward with if you're
trying to make such a major
change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just to quickly
go over the numbers, approval
overall, 17 percent of the
Senate plan,
disapproval, 55 percent.
And then when you ask
people if they approved
of the way Republicans
in Congress are handling
health care, it was 21
percent approval, 65
percent disapproval.
Amy, what does
all this tell you?
AMY WALTER, The Cook
Political Report: Yes.
Well, Lee makes a very
good point that, even
among Republicans,
there's not a tremendous
amount of support, not only
for the bill, but for the way
that Republicans in Congress
are handling it.
I think a very small plurality
of Republicans said they like
the job that Republicans in
Congress are doing on this.
Quite frankly, Republicans
have not done a very good job
shaping and defining this bill.
It's being defined by what it
isn't as much as by what it is.
And that's pretty clear
in the polling data
that we're seeing here.
The other interesting thing that
I found in this poll was that,
when they asked the question
about who would you blame
if this all falls apart, if
there's no repeal of Obamacare,
and most Americans -- this is
true of Democrat, Republican,
independent -- they don't blame
Donald Trump.
They either blame Republicans
-- independents and Democrats
say they would blame Republicans
in Congress.
Republicans say they
blame Democrats mostly.
But Trump gets
very little blame.
LEE MIRINGOFF: What is really
interesting is that although
Obamacare really doesn't
have a champion right now, most
of the talk has been how to
replace and repeal, it remains
popular with Americans.
And I think -- so the
Republican proposal not
only wasn't well-organized.
It really flew in the face
of what public opinion is, so
really going uphill on this.
And I think that's why
they have had such a
difficult time with it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lee, you
also asked the generic question,
what do people think of
the job the president is doing?
And I think, not
surprising, along party
lines, a large majority
of Republicans like what
he's doing.
A large majority of Democrats
dislike it, but among
independents, some interesting,
interesting results.
LEE MIRINGOFF: Yes, and the
independents are the group,
of course, in the middle.
And, you know, they're much more
like Democrats right now than
Republicans in terms of their
attitude.
And they have grown in their
disapproval of President Trump
since the first poll right
after he took office.
And now almost 60 percent
of independents have a
negative view of him.
And those numbers have gone
up, the negative numbers have.
So there's a real question on
their part about the direction
the country is going in and
a lot of other concerns that
they have on an issue-by-issue
basis, health care being
one, but others of concern
to independents as well.
They were willing to
give him the benefit
of the doubt initially,
but that has certainly
evaporated, and whatever
political capital he
had with this group,
that's been well spent
- - or it has been
spent, I should say.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy, what do
you see in these numbers,
especially among independents?
AMY WALTER: Yes, Lee framed it
perfectly, which is whatever
benefit of the doubt they
may be giving -- they may have
been giving the president in
January, and it was a very
thin benefit, it's been
dried up pretty well by now.
But you're also looking, if
you just think historically
or look historically, at what
it means to have support for
independents this low, and if
you look at the last midterm
elections where a president
had low approval ratings with
independents at this number,
somewhere between 30 percent,
35 percent approval rating among
independents, they went on to
lose a very large number of
seats in that midterm election.
And that really could be the
tipping point for a lot of
these Republicans, too, who are
up in 2018.
They may sit in districts that
a Republican carried or that
are Republican-leaning, but
they count on independents
coming over and supporting
the Republican in the November
election.
If those independents are
feeling dissatisfied or
they're feeling dispirited,
or, quite frankly,
they're feeling angry --
that's the other important
thing to note about this poll.
It's not just that independents
felt like they didn't
approve of Donald Trump.
Their strong disapproval
ratings of Donald Trump are
somewhere -- for President Trump
- - are somewhere in the 40
percent range vs. just I think
it's in the teens that strongly
support him.
So that intensity of
disapproval is a real - -
should be a real warning
sign for all Republicans,
especially those
who are up in 2018.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly,
Lee, you also asked a question
I hadn't seen before, and
that was comparing who is a
more effective leader, President
Trump or former President
Obama?
Thirty-four percent
President Trump, 58
percent President Obama.
I guess that mirrors overall
support for this president.
LEE MIRINGOFF: Yes.
Look, and former presidents
always look do better after
they have completed their term
in office, but at this
point in President
Obama's administration
in '09, his numbers
were in the mid-50s.
Contrast that with the low
to mid-30s with Donald Trump,
and you see the answer to the
question, why is this president
having such a difficult time
in the court of public opinion?
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
fascinating numbers.
There's more there.
I know everybody
will want to dig in.
You can find it all
on our Web site.
In the meantime, Lee Miringoff
of Marist, Amy Walter of The
Cook Political Report, thank
you both.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
LEE MIRINGOFF: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just one
more of the poll's findings.
When asked about the president's
financial dealings, 33 percent
of those polled say they
believe he has done
something illegal.
An additional 28 percent
feel he has done something
unethical, but not illegal.
And 31 percent believe he
has done nothing wrong.
Our correspondent John Yang
takes a closer look at ethical
concerns over the president's
business interests
and his unprecedented
early reelection run.
JOHN YANG: The day President
Trump took the oath of office,
he did something no chief
executive before him had ever
done on Inauguration Day, filed
the paperwork to be an official
candidate for reelection.
The move allows him to raise,
money more than $13 million in
the first three months of the
year, and hold rallies paid for
by his campaign, like this one
last week in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: We're not even
campaigning, and look at this
crowd.
MAN: The president
of the United States!
JOHN YANG: But he
is campaigning.
His first reelection
event was just 29 days
into his presidency.
All five of his campaign-paid
rallies have been in states he
won in last year's election:
Florida, Kentucky, Tennessee,
Pennsylvania, and Iowa.
Campaign events give him greater
flexibility, like being able
to sell Make America Great
Again merchandise.
MICHAEL STEEL, Republican
Strategist: This is
an opportunity for the
president to spread
his message directly to his most
active and energized supporters.
It's also an opportunity
to raise money, to
sell merchandise.
In some cases, like the
fund-raiser here in Washington,
it's an opportunity to patronize
his own business establishments.
DONALD TRUMP: And I am here to
tell you about our incredible
progress in making America
great again.
JOHN YANG: They have been
vintage Donald Trump.
DONALD TRUMP: We are
going to start taking
care of our country.
JOHN YANG: And they seem to
boost Mr. Trump's mood, getting
him out of Washington and in
front of enthusiastic crowds.
Tonight, here at the
Trump International Hotel,
just five blocks away
from the White House,
the first big fund-raiser of the
2020 campaign, it's benefiting
both the Trump campaign and
the Republican
National Committee.
The top ticket is
$35,000 a head.
The choice of venue highlights
the flow of campaign cash into
Trump Organization businesses,
a practice, which is legal, of
his first run that continues
in his bid for reelection.
The Trump campaign
declined a request to
comment for this story.
But deputy campaign manager
Michael Glassner told the
Associated Press that they chose
the Trump Hotel because it's a
premier and convenient location.
The president has walked away
from day-to-day management of
his hotels, golf courses and
other businesses, placing all
his assets into a trust, of
which he's the sole beneficiary.
Ethics lawyer Kenneth Gross
says he's never seen a candidate
pay so much money to his
own businesses.
KENNETH GROSS, Ethics
Law Expert: What we saw
during the campaign is
the campaign committee
paying Trump facilities,
whether it's the Trump Hotel
or Mar-a-Lago, or renting space
from the Trump Tower in New
York, which it did for the
campaign headquarters, buying
Trump steaks, Trump vodka,
Trump wine, Trump ice.
All this is money from the
campaign that eventually
goes to fatten the
wallets of Trump, Inc.
I don't know of anything illegal
about having a campaign do
a campaign visit at your own
owned facility, as long
as it's arms-length.
But I think, from an appearance
standpoint, it's not great.
JOHN YANG: The reelection
campaign spent more
than $6.3 million in
the first three months
of the year.
More than $450,000 of that
went to Trump businesses,
including rent at the
Trump Tower in New York
and Trump hotels in New York
and Las Vegas, catering from
Trump restaurants, and thousands
of dollars for
Trump bottled water.
Critics say holding campaign
events at Trump properties
also gives them free publicity
and added prestige.
A lawsuit from the Democratic
attorneys general of
Maryland and the District
of Columbia alleges
that, since Mr. Trump took
office, goods and services sold
by various Trump businesses
have sold at a premium.
It said room rates at
his D.C. hotel have gone
up hundreds of dollars.
KARL RACINE, D.C. Attorney
General: Never in the history
of this country have we had
a president with these
kinds of extensive business
entanglements or a president who
refused to adequately distance
themselves from their holdings.
JOHN YANG: White House Press
Secretary Sean Spicer called
the suit partisan politics.
Tonight, at the Trump Hotel
fund-raiser, the only politics
on anybody's mind is likely
to be the 2020 campaign, as
the man who rewrote the book on
running for president appears
to be trying to rewrite the
book on running for reelection.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
John Yang in Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we
reported earlier, governments
and industries the
world over are trying to
deal with effects of the latest
in a series of cyber-attacks.
The so-called ransomware
assault is the second such
strike in the last six weeks.
Hari Sreenivasan in
New York has more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This
attack originated yesterday
in Ukraine, and rapidly
spread through Europe
and beyond.
The virus is called
Petya, and it takes
over infected computers,
effectively locking out
users.
A payment is required to return
control of the machine and data.
In early May, a similar
virus called WannaCry spread
to over 150 countries.
This new attack shows
signs of greater technical
sophistication, but
both apparently used,
in part, a tool developed by the
U.S. National Security Agency,
a tool that was leaked into
the open last year.
With me now for more on
this is Rodney Joffe.
He is the senior vice president
and national security executive
for Neustar, a cyber-security
firm.
Rodney, it seems that we have
not learned that much from
what happened two months ago,
but it seems that the attackers
have learned a little bit more.
RODNEY JOFFE, Senior
Vice President and Senior
Technologist, Neustar,
Inc.: There's no question
that this is more sophisticated.
When we look at the code, when
we look at the mechanism that
was used, this one is much
more sophisticated.
It actually uses three different
vectors we have seen so far.
The vector you're talking about
that was used in WannaCry is
the third option that is used
by this one.
It uses two others, but
the damage is much more
significant in this case.
This is not looking like so much
like ransomware anymore, but
it's starting to look like it's
a deliberate attempt to cause
havoc by destroying machines.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is
this something that a
hacker collective would
do, or is this something
that a state government
would be interested in
doing, destabilizing
Ukraine from all of
these companies that do business
with it or pay taxes to it?
RODNEY JOFFE: You know,
it's real tough these
days to tell where the
dividing line is between
the criminals and nation
states, and they really do work
hand in hand, especially in
Eastern Europe.
But if you look this, the
criminals are obviously out
there for financial gain.
This was set up in such a way
that there's very little chance
of much in terms of financial
gain.
I think, as of last evening,
by the way, there was $10,500
that had actually paid into this
wallet.
And I have got to tell
you that the effort that
went into writing the
code and distributing
it clearly cost a lot
more than $10,500.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What
is the measurable impact
on Ukraine going forward?
RODNEY JOFFE: I think that the
biggest problem that they're
going to be facing is the fact
that the ability to pay taxes to
the state is seriously affected.
We have seen images that
were tweeted of things
like supermarkets where
the checkout systems
had been compromised -- and
we're showing the screen.
We also see the very large --
obviously, the multinational
shipping line that has now been
affected.
So, it looks like a deliberate
attempt to cause some kind of
significant financial impact,
not just on the citizens of
Ukraine, but on Ukraine itself.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You
know, when you said
you noticed differences
in the design between
the WannaCry and this, do we
have any indication that paying
these people off actually gets
you your data back, or was it
not even designed to do that?
RODNEY JOFFE: Theoretically,
it was designed to do that,
but it's clear so far that the
mechanism that was put in place
to actually collect ransom is
nowhere near the sophistication
of the malware itself.
And you don't think that someone
would have made that kind
of mistake, built something
that was very, very effective
to compromise, and no
real ability to collect.
We haven't seen or heard
of anyone so far who has
been able to decrypt it.
And what we also know is that,
within a very short time after
the malware was discovered,
the single e-mail address
that was needed to communicate
with was actually shut down
by the provider.
So that's one reason that I
believe that no one is going
to be able to easily get their
data back.
The second thing is that there
are reports that are surfacing
now, as folks have looked
at the code, that there is
at least one bug in the code
that actually makes it so that
decryption is not possible.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Are the rest
of us basically collateral
damage when it comes to what's
happening, say, between
Ukraine and Russia?
This is falling on the
day now where this is
Constitution Day for Ukraine.
They're celebrating their
independence from Russia,
what, 21 years ago.
RODNEY JOFFE: We clearly
are collateral damage.
This was obviously
targeted at Ukraine.
But it is affecting others.
However, one of the things that
we have learned in the past is
that, in many ways, the people
behind a lot of the
malware don't care about
the collateral damage.
They have a single target or
a single objective, and they
don't really seem to care.
We have seen that for years.
This is no different.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rodney Joffe
joining us from Washington,
D.C., tonight, thanks so
much.
RODNEY JOFFE: Thanks
for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
why there is still no vaccine
for Lyme disease; and from
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf,
bestselling author Scott Turow
and his latest legal thriller
set after the Bosnian War.
But first: Britain's
Prime Minister Theresa
May has promised a
national investigation
into the exterior paneling,
called cladding, used
in the construction of
high-rise buildings,
this in the wake of the London
apartment fire two weeks ago
that left at least 80 dead.
Testing shows that the paneling
is highly flammable, and is
found on apartment blocks
around Britain.
It is thought to have
accelerated the fire.
The disaster at Grenfell
Tower has seriously
undermined confidence
in Prime Minister May's
Conservative
minority government.
Many believe the tragedy could
mark a turning point in how
Britain cares for its poorest.
From London, Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The faces
of Grenfell Tower haunt the
streets of North Kensington.
Hope that the missing will
ever be found has long expired.
Two weeks on, the official
death toll remains at 79.
This traumatized community is
convinced at least 100 perished,
if not more, in what was
a high-rise crematorium.
DAVID LAMMY, Parliament Member:
Grenfell is a monumental
disaster on a scale that we have
not seen for a generation.
It raises huge issues about how
Britain cares for people that
are poorer in our social housing
in particular who need
the state to house them.
It's absolutely clear that what
we have seen is gross negligence
or corporate manslaughter.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The
memorials proffer silent
protests and demand reform.
Lawmaker David Lammy, who
lost a friend in the fire,
is leading the charge.
DAVID LAMMY: At its heart,
Brits like to see themselves
as fair and as tolerant.
What they saw in Grenfell
has alarmed them.
They really saw the face
of a welfare state that
has largely disappeared.
I do believe Grenfell
is a turning point.
It's a Hurricane Katrina moment.
MALCOLM BRABANT: During urgent
safety spot checks in 120
public housing blocks across
Britain, cladding in
every single case failed
fire resistance tests.
In the London borough of
Camden, the risk to tenants was
compounded by other inadequate
fire protection measures and
considered so severe that the
council ordered the immediate
evacuation of 4,000
people over last weekend.
MAN: I think they're behaving
ridiculous, to be quite
honest with you, because they
have known for seven years
about all this stuff.
MAN: The system is broken,
it's cracking up, and it's
evident to see for everybody.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As
refugees from the wars
of former Yugoslavia,
Alen and Andrea Kevric
are used to leaving
home in a hurry.
The council gave them $7,500
for temporary accommodation
during repairs, but a private
rental agency rejected them.
ANDREA KEVRIC, Nurse: They
actually realized who we are,
that we are plebs from social
housing.
And they don't want us there.
This is the reality, how people
are treated in this country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: According to
local council officials, the
fire department recommended
evacuation, but hundreds of
residents refused to move.
The Kevrices, who have four
children, are uncertain about
their immediate future in
a country that has
become their home.
In common with many immigrants,
they have low-paid jobs and
are priced out of London's
expensive housing market.
ANDREA KEVRIC: To make some
kind of decent living, I have
to be in social housing, which
I'm very lucky to be
in, because it's so rare
and hard to come by.
I was lucky to get it.
And so my rent is considerably
reduced, but, even with
that, we just make ends meet.
ALEN KEVRIC, Premises Manager:
The divide between rich and
poor unfortunately only gets
exposed with the worst
kind of disasters.
History will teach us as well
that's the only way when we
can actually ask for change.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This crisis
coincides with a slew of
reports highlighting poverty in
Britain.
The U.N. children's agency,
UNICEF, says Britain has some of
the highest levels of hunger and
deprivation amongst the
world's richest nations.
It claims that one in
three British children
experience poverty in
terms of food, clothing
and social activities.
The housing charity shelter
warns a million families could
be made homeless by 2020.
Volunteers at this food bank
in the heart of London are
taking delivery of donations
that will help
sustain 50 people.
The food bank charity Trussell
Trust is reporting today that
four in five of its clients are
going hungry for days at a time.
DOROTHEA HACKMAN, Trussell
Trust: A big group of those are
not receiving their benefits,
benefit delayed.
The next biggest
group are low-income.
And these are people
who are just managing.
And one crisis, a canceled
day's work, an additional bill,
a sick child, any of those
issues can tip them
into desperately
needing more assistance.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Dr.
Youssef El-Gingihy, a
general practitioner and
author who has campaigned
against cuts in the National
Health Service, believes that
Britain's political tide is
turning irrevocably.
DR.
YOUSSEF EL-GINGIHY,
Activist: Austerity kills.
This terrible tragedy
with the Grenfell Tower
fire has unfortunately
become this grim monument,
this rather ghastly memorial for
the Conservative government's
austerity regime of massive cuts
to public spending,
particularly on public services.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The
argument about austerity
erupted in Parliament today.
Are there questions
for the prime minister.
Jeremy Corbyn?
JEREMY CORBYN, Leader,
Labor Party: This
disregard for working-class
communities, the terrible
consequences of deregulation
and cutting corners, I urge the
prime minister to come up with
the resources needed to
test and remove cladding,
retrofit sprinklers,
properly fund the fire
service and the police, so that
all our communities can truly
feel safe in their own homes.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: The cladding of
tower blocks didn't start under
this government.
It didn't start under the
previous coalition government.
The cladding of tower
blocks began under
the Blair government.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It's
been 10 years since Tony
Blair was prime minister.
Under Corbyn, Labor has
returned to its socialist
roots, and a rock star
welcome at last weekend's
Glastonbury music festival
showed his popularity
amongst young people.
JEREMY CORBYN: Is it right that
so many people in our country
have no home to live in, and
only a street to sleep on?
AUDIENCE: No!
JEREMY CORBYN: Is it right that
so many people live in such
poverty in a society surrounded
by such riches?
No, it obviously is not.
CLAIRE-LOUISE LEYLAND, Camden
Councillor: Did you like it?
MALCOLM BRABANT:
Conservatives like Camden
Councillor Claire-Louise
Leyland are fighting
Corbyn's portrayal of the
Conservatives as uncaring.
CLAIRE-LOUISE LEYLAND: It's
duplicitous and I think really
unhelpful for people who are
trying to deal with trauma
to try and turn this into
such a simple argument.
Difficult choices were made.
Things happened that shouldn't
have happened, and we need to
really explore what went wrong.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As the
politicians fight for the moral
high ground over Grenfell, there
is yet another report about
divided Britain by a commission
which says that successive
Labor and Conservative
governments have failed
to reduce the gap
between the haves and the
have-nots.
The Social Mobility Commission
warns that, unless there is
urgent radical and reform,
the divisions in Britain
will get widen even,
threatening social cohesion
and economic prosperity.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in London.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is peak
season in the United States
for Lyme disease, as people
spend more time outdoors and
can be at risk for tick bites.
Each year, at least 30,000 cases
are reported, and researchers
believe those estimates are
low.
Given its debilitating
effects on some people, and
after years of research,
it begs the question:
Why is there still no
vaccine people can get
to prevent Lyme disease?
Miles O'Brien has been
exploring that for his weekly
reports on the Leading Edge of
science and technology.
MILES O'BRIEN: It looks like a
routine medical visit, but Dr.
Linden Hu of Tufts University
is prepping a patient
for a procedure that
would tick me off.
DR.
HU LINDEN, Tufts University:
So now we're going to just
put the ticks in there.
They move really fast,
so you keep an eye, too.
MILES O'BRIEN: He is placing 28
larval ticks on a volunteer's
arm, hoping they will help
solve some of the
mysteries of Lyme disease.
KYRAN ROMANOWSKI, Lyme
Disease Sufferer: I'm nervous.
I'm not particularly thrilled
having 30 ticks in my arm.
MILES O'BRIEN: Kyran Romanowski
was diagnosed with Lyme
disease in June of 2016.
His symptoms, achy
joints, fatigue and
memory recall lapses, have
persisted long after he
stopped taking antibiotics.
KYRAN ROMANOWSKI: Why am I still
having these symptoms when I had
all these courses of treatment?
You know, is the bacteria
still in my body?
I don't know.
MILES O'BRIEN:
Neither do doctors.
About 10 percent to 15 percent
of people who get Lyme report
stubborn symptoms for months,
even years, even after
antibiotic treatment.
Is it lingering
damage from Lyme?
Are the body's natural
defenses stuck in attack mode?
Or is it something else?
DR.
LINDEN HU: So, another
possibility is that the bacteria
persist, and they haven't been
eradicated by the antibiotic
treatment, and that the immune
system may still be recognizing
them and fighting them
and causing symptoms of
inflammation and infection.
MILES O'BRIEN: Could the
Lyme disease bacteria,
Borrelia burgdorferi, be
cleverly hiding inside
the human body?
Doctors cannot detect the
organisms using existing blood
tests, but Dr. Hu hopes Borrelia
and ticks are like
magnet and steel.
DR.
LINDEN HU: The bacteria are so
well-adapted to their natural
vector, the tick, that they're
able to sense the tick, and the
tick acts as a concentrating
vessel to allow you to
better sample
what's in the host.
MILES O'BRIEN: After removing
these ticks, Dr. Hu will grind
them up and test them for
the Lyme bacteria.
The ticks have been bred in the
lab, under sterile conditions,
so if Borrelia is there,
it can only have come
from the patient.
Deploying ticks as bacteria
detectors may seem far from a
practical test, but it could
give researchers some
ideas on how to devise one.
Rheumatologist Allen Steere
and his team at Massachusetts
General Hospital are working
on better tests and
treatments as well.
His lab is filled with more
than 40 years of blood, cells
and tissues samples from Lyme
suffers.
In 1975, Steere was the
investigator who first
connected the dots between
a cluster of children
with symptoms of arthritis in
Lyme, Connecticut, and what came
to be known as Lyme disease.
DR.
ALLEN STEERE, Massachusetts
General Hospital: My career
has largely been focused on the
elucidation of Lyme disease
in human patients, what it's
like clinically, development of
diagnostic test and treatment
strategies with various courses
antibiotic therapy, but then
also prevention of the
disease by vaccination.
MILES O'BRIEN: The Lyme
disease vaccine which he helped
develop is a sore subject.
Sold under the brand
name LYMErix by
SmithKline Beecham, now
GlaxoSmithKline, it was first
prescribed in 1998.
It was 80 percent effective
at stemming the disease.
But hundreds of recipients
claimed the vaccine made
their Lyme symptoms worse.
Federal investigators found no
scientific proof the vaccine was
the cause of their complaints,
but anti-vaccine advocacy
groups threatened class-action
lawsuits, and sales plummeted.
In 2002, SmithKline took
LYMErix off the market.
DR.
ALLEN STEERE: And I think
the time has come to
reconsider the decision.
Lyme disease is the only
infection that I know
of for which there is
an effective vaccine,
but it's not available
to the public.
MILES O'BRIEN: Unless
you happen to be a dog.
Giselle, the miniature
dachshund, is getting
her Lyme vaccine shot
at the Angell Animal
Medical Center run by
the Massachusetts Society
for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals.
Her owner is veterinarian
Susan O'Bell.
SUSAN O'BELL, Veterinarian: I
just feel very fortunate that
there are several Lyme vaccine
options for dogs, although I
have to say, when I pull ticks
off of my children, I wish
that I had some easy options
like vaccination or prevention,
like I can give for my dogs,
because it's an issue for
people and their pets alike.
It sure seems like something
we should be working on to
prevent, one way or another.
MILES O'BRIEN: And, in fact,
the French biotech firm Valneva
is in the first phase of U.S.
Food and Drug Administration
testing on a new vaccine
that is similar to LYMErix.
In the 15 years since
the vaccine was pulled
off the market, Lyme
has exploded into an
epidemic; 300,000 people
get it every year.
Kyran Romanowski hopes his
five-day stint of tick hosting
will in some way help reduce
that number.
DR.
LINDEN HU: It looks like a
couple ticks have been fed
and they're still feeding.
KYRAN ROMANOWSKI: Some
people are grossed out.
Why would you do that?
And I told someone,
and they freaked out.
You are going to
put 30 ticks on you.
Are you crazy?
MILES O'BRIEN: He may not be
squeamish, but he was pretty
happy when Dr. Hu took them
off.
DR.
LINDEN HU: Glad to see
them go, Mr. Romanowski?
KYRAN ROMANOWSKI: I am ecstatic.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dr. Hu
would share that emotion
if his results would stop
this raging, uncontrolled
epidemic.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Miles O'Brien in Boston.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: A
bestselling novelist
takes on war crimes.
Jeffrey Brown has our
latest addition to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: In 2004,
400 people were rounded
up from their homes in
a village in Bosnia,
and buried alive in
an old coal mine.
But did this mass
killing really happen?
And, if so, who were
the perpetrators?
Those questions must be decided
at the International Criminal
Court in the Netherlands.
It's the setting for a new legal
thriller titled "Testimony"
and a new setting for acclaimed
author Scott Turow, the attorney
and writer whose work has sold
more than 30 million copies
since his debut novel,
"Presumed Innocent."
I'm not going to name all the
other bestsellers, Scott, but
it's nice to talk to you here.
SCOTT TUROW, Author,
"Testimony": Jeff, it's
nice to talk to you.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have
left behind the fictional
Kindle County, the
setting that many of us
are familiar with, that place
that's sort of familiar,
for a much broader palette.
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why?
SCOTT TUROW: You know, I
just sort of accumulated
a writer's bucket list,
and one of the things,
years ago, that I decided I
would write about at some point
is the International Criminal
Court and The Hague,
just because I had never
read anything set there.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you started
with the idea of the court.
SCOTT TUROW: I did, for sure.
JEFFREY BROWN: Something
intrigued you about
those kinds of trials?
SCOTT TUROW: I had been in The
Hague in the year 2000, and
had found myself at a party
surrounded by a bunch
of American lawyers
who were saying, you
have got to write about
this place.
And unlike most times when
people have ideas about Aunt
Tilly's watch or their divorce,
this sounded like it
would actually make an
interesting setting.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have
the legal background,
and you're an attorney.
How much research goes
into all of these -- the
stories that you write?
SCOTT TUROW: A lot.
I'm a year off my usual
cycle, because I went to
the Netherlands twice.
I went to Bosnia once.
I had a lot to learn about
first the court, even more to
learn about the Roma people,
and, of course, the Bosnian
conflict, about which I
was inexcusably ignorant.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this
is set in the aftermath
of the Bosnian War.
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's
about a group of Roma,
often known as gypsies...
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: ... who
are still living there...
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: ...
but resettled there.
SCOTT TUROW: Yes.
Resettled in the
fictional world, resettled
after the Bosnian War,
driven out of Kosovo,
and have chosen to live right
near the American NATO bases
in Bosnia, which were there for
a decade after the war to
sort of keep the peace.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you
have this big story.
You have this history.
But the way in, as always,
is a particular character.
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: In this case,
a lawyer from Kindle County.
SCOTT TUROW: From Kindle County.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
SCOTT TUROW: The former U.S.
attorney in Kindle County.
JEFFREY BROWN: A very successful
man, who - - but is unfulfilled.
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
Thrown his life up for grabs,
says that he has never felt
fully at home with himself.
And that helps explain why
he'd be willing to leave the
United States to work overseas.
JEFFREY BROWN: And is that
the way in for you, really?
SCOTT TUROW: What interested
me was when I found that the
United States Congress had
passed a law called the U.S.
Service-Members Protection Act,
which says that the president
has authority to forcibly
rescue anybody -- any
American serviceman charged
before the International
Criminal Court.
So, of course, the novelist
says, ah, good, conflict.
And so the idea of an American
prosecutor investigating,
among other suspects, American
service members was
immediately interesting.
JEFFREY BROWN: We can't go into
all the details of this plot
here, but, I mean, it's fair
to say that the book continues
what I think I can call your
own complicated relationship
to the law?
SCOTT TUROW: Yes, I think so.
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, as a
kind of a both noble calling,
but also the -- what's the
word, a tawdriness, in
some ways of the law.
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
There cannot be any greater
challenge to the law than
trying to adjudicate mass crimes
like war crimes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
I keep thinking, in your work
and in this one, that most of
us look at the legal system
as a way to get at the truth.
Do you think of it as that,
or as a way to get at a truth,
or what's going on there,
and what is it that
helps translates for
you as a novelist?
SCOTT TUROW: Well, you know,
I really think of the trial
of a lawsuit as an exercise in
history.
And people are offering
competing visions of what
happened in the past.
And the justice system
is willing to accept
either of those competing
visions and to impose
consequences as a result.
When you think of it that way,
it's a little bit startling,
because we want to believe
that there is one truth and,
therefore, one justice, whereas,
if you have practiced law
as long as I have, you realize
that there is actually a
range of acceptable outcomes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
Of course, truth these days
is a kind of fraught concept.
SCOTT TUROW: Yes, it's...
JEFFREY BROWN: But it always
has been -- it sounds like
it always has been for you.
SCOTT TUROW: Well, it
is in the courtroom.
And it was frustrating
for me as a prosecutor.
When I wrote "Presumed Innocent"
originally, I didn't say
who had committed the crime.
And I had a long heart-to-heart
with myself about the
purpose of the mystery.
And one thing the mystery does
is deliver to us a certainty
that life and the courtroom
very often can't.
JEFFREY BROWN: Has
that continued?
Because I actually saw an
interview where you said, "I'm
a big believer in the fact
that all authors really
write only one book."
SCOTT TUROW: Right.
I think that's true.
And the older I get, the
more I'm trying to figure
out what the book is and why.
I know that, in a
book like "Testimony,"
issues like identity are
enormously important.
No character is fully at home.
And I have a hard time isolating
what it is in myself that
makes me so fascinated with
that theme, because I
came from a normal upper
middle-class family.
And yet, as I look back at my
books, the uses of power, issues
of identity, they have -- it's
recurrent.
It happens again and again.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, a lot of
people continue to read your one
book in its many forms, right?
(LAUGHTER)
SCOTT TUROW: Fortunately for me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Good for you.
SCOTT TUROW: I'm
grateful to all of them.
JEFFREY BROWN: The new
one is "Testimony."
Scott Turow, nice
to talk to you.
Thank you.
SCOTT TUROW: Jeff, it's
good to talk to you, too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the
"NewsHour" online right
now: A new biography of
Britain's Prince Charles
reveals a side of the
heir to the throne that
most haven't seen before.
You can watch Margaret
Warner's full interview with
author Sally Bedell Smith.
That's on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.